From: "Pieter Hintjens" <ph@imatix.com>
Subject: Liberetto V/2
Date: 17 February 2000 7:15:45 NZDT
To: "Liberetto" <editors@imatix.com>
Reply-To: editors@imatix.com

    =
--- === ---------------------------------------------------------------------
 =======    -L- -I- -B- -E- -R- -E- -T- -T- -O-                February 2000
=========
 =======    The iMatix Newsletter                           Volume V Issue 2
--- === ---------------------------------------------------------------------
    =              Copyright (c) 2000 iMatix Corporation - distribute freely
                                        Back issues at http://www.imatix.com
                                             Comments to: editors@imatix.com

   Programming -- Technology -- Finite State Machines -- News -- Other Stuff


== COMMENT ---...-.-...-.--...-.--...-.-...-.....---..-....--.--..-.-.---.--

   I spent the last week or so in Milwaukee, Wisconsin, explaining to a
   group of IT and business people from a large US corporation what we
   were proposing to build for them, and how.  The story is that this
   company has decided to create a back-office order and supply network
   using the Internet, and Internet applications, and iMatix will be the
   company that builds it for them.

   To some extent, we were the only people crazy enough to think we could
   do the job in the timeframe demanded.  More concretely, in a business
   where careers are built in months, and 'experts' are judged on their
   haircuts, we were able to bring several decades' experience to the
   table.  Yes, we know the difference between a robust, fast application
   and a web prototype.  Yes, we know the cost of a poor database design
   compared to the power and flexibility of a good database design.  By an
   amazing coincidence, we happen to be experts in SSL security.  Oh yes,
   we can generate large parts of the code, especially those parts no-one
   wants to touch.  Yes, we suggest using XML for everything.  Take a look
   at our little GSLgen code generator.  And so on...

   It took just half a day to convince the IT people that we knew what we
   were taking about, and half a day more to agree to do the project.  We
   then spent the next few days creating the basic framework for the
   application, agreeing on a project plan and who would do what. This is
   stunningly quick.

   Now of course, us iMatix guys are good at presenting our technology and
   capabilities (modesty aside).  But I think the real reason why this
   project got off the ground so fast, and so well, is that we have entered
   that cycle of web development where the meat has hit the wall, so to
   speak.

   A year ago, a competent web page designer could throw together a 'web
   application' using some VB scripting and a database designed on the
   fly.  So long as the graphics looked good, no-one would complain about
   the speed.  When things got too slow, just upgrade the mother(board).

   Today, Internet applications are creating a new model for business data
   processing.  We've moved from the centralized mainframe world, through
   a PC client-server age to a web-based world where the mainframe once
   again rules supreme, except that it's now handling several thousand
   concurrent users, and is built from bunches of cheap PC boxes.  It's a
   rare software developer who can map the new web applications onto the
   rules we learnt in the mainframe days.

   Pieter Hintjens
   15th February


== NEWS .-...----.-.----....-.--...----.-.---...-.---...-.--.-...---.--..-..

   Incident Report...
       Yesterday our primary DNS (Don't Know server) failed due to excessive
       RDNS (Really Dont Know server) queries from the internet.  Following
       this failure, our HTTP (Highly Technical Thingy Protocol) and FTP
       (Fairly Technical Protocol) servers crashed. Our Linux (Linux is not
       Unix, xetera) systems held-up, but our Windows NT (Non-Technical)
       servers reported VxD (very excessive damage) errors using the
       traditional blue background (red for danger, yellow for warning,
       blue for you're really up the boondeeks).  After several hours, our
       tactical response team (they do not swear at the customers) managed
       to reboot the IP VNAT router (I Presume: Very Nasty and Problematic),
       to the delight of all.  All that are left are some bad sectors
       (especially the area next to the coffee machine) and a fragmented
       hard disk (it fell onto the floor when we were degaussing the
       portable).
       Signed, Ignus O'Ramus.

   Samsung announces net-aware kitchen appliances
       No joking.  The next fridge you buy might be wired to the net.  The
       3rd-millennium microwave could ask www.cookme.com for hints on how to
       cook that bag of popcorn you just threw-in.  "Please wait, connecting
       to www.cookme.com... Dialing... Line busy.  Redialing...  Have
       connection.  Sending password.  Logging-in to remote server.  Looking
       up www.cookme.com...  Error: host unknown."  Hmmm.  Anything this bad
       is bound to be a success.

   SCO will start selling Linux products, takes stake in Caldera
       With SCO, the owner of the UNIX name and heritage, buying into
       Caldera, one of the most respected Linux distributors, this marks
       the end of Unix as a separate entity.  Linux did what UNIX never
       could - it established a standard and created a viable competitor
       to Windows.  This reinforces my opinion that Linux is on the way to
       becoming the Operating System, much like TCP/IP became The Network.
       It's no longer a matter of if, but when, Microsoft will start
       giving Windows away for free in order to stem the growth of Linux
       in the home and workplace.

   Is this really funny?
       Two guys went to college together in the early 90's, and met many
       years later. One worked for AOL, and the other worked for Microsoft.
       The Microsoft guy visited the AOLer's house and was impressed by his
       swimming pool, large house, and Mercedes. "How did you do it?" he
       asked. His friend showed him a computer screen running Netscape
       Navigator, and said "See that software - 10%".  Later, the Microsoft
       guy invited the AOLer to his place, and the AOLer was stunned to see
       a gigantic mansion, with swimming pools, tennis courts, and ten
       Mercedes parked outside.  The AOLer said "Wow! You've done really
       well.  How did you do it?"  The Microsofter showed him an shelf of
       empty software boxes from dozens of now-defunct software vendors, 
       and said: "see all that software - 100%".

   And the lucky winners are...
       T-shirts are on their way to: Emanuel Levy, Glenn Williams, Bernard
       de Rubinat, Art Pollard, Kovacs Istvan, Bill Powell, John Klassa,
       Steve Freeman, Ron Crain, Terry Stebbens and Veronica Parsons.
       Thanks for your e-mails!!


== MAIL .-.-.--.-.-.--.-.----...-.-..--.-.-.--.-.-.--.-.----....-.--....---.

   From:           	Justin Gamble <justin@cs.ualberta.ca>
   Subject:        	Libero -- GUI tool? 
   -----------------------------------------------------------------------
   Hi,
   I have downloaded Libero, and tried to execute it.  After reading through
   most of the available documentation, and even playing with some of the
   examples, I still am perplexed.
   I was under the impression that Libero was a GUI tool.  By this I mean
   that we run Libero, and up pops a GUI which we then manipulate until we
   have a diagram that we like, and then we (somehow) generate the code.
   But, I don't see any Libero screenshots in the documentation, and further
   I cannot seem to get any GUI to pop up during execution.  My platform is
   Linux.
   It appears that Libero is a textual tool only.  By this I mean that I
   program a Libero script (in plain text), and then use Libero to convert
   it to other languages.  Is this the case, or is there an associated GUI?
   Am I missing something?
   Thank you,
   Justin


   Libero is a mind-tool.  The concepts it uses are not complex, but they
   are subtle and widely applicable.  Deep rather than wide.  This makes a
   GUI irrelevant, because it's easier to fire-up a text editor than a
   GUI, and a Libero GUI really does not add very much.  That said, we did
   once write a Windows GUI for Libero, mainly to market the idea to a
   largely skeptical world.  Since those days, Libero has proven itself in
   a host of places.  The best thing about the Windows GUI is that it cuts
   the 'Aha, I got it!' period from three days to two.  The worst thing is
   that it's written in Visual Basic, a language that was never intended
   for serious programs.


   From:           	Terry Stebbens <terry.stebbens@vocalis.com>
   Subject:        	RE: Liberetto V/1 - Happy Third Millennium
   -----------------------------------------------------------------------
   Hi.
   Thanks for an amusing newsletter. I was very disappointed that the world
   didn't end at midnight at the beginning of this year because now I have
   a large credit card bill to pay for all the partying I did... The worst
   thing that happened here in Mexico (my new place of work) was that all
   the Cablevision T.V.'s apparently cut out for five seconds exactly on the
   count of zero! I was under the table at this point and missed it. I think
   that some of the "hastily trained COBOL programmers" are also being sent
   back to jobs as real-estate agents too, by the way.
   Anyway, I was wondering why you chose to have your FSMs in the form:

   State-Name
       (--) Event-Name1 -> Next-State1
            + Actions
       (--) Event-Name2 -> Next-State2
            + Actions

   and not the more popular:

   State-Name
        + Actions
           (--) Event-Name1 -> Next-State1
           (--) Event-Name2 -> Next-State2

   Everyone I know was taught the second way (including myself) and I find
   this easier to draw in a diagram than your way. Is this iMatix just
   trying to be different or was there a reason?
   Cheers,
   Terry Stebbens
   Sales Consultant, Vocalis Latin America
   http://www.vocalis.com/


   Well, we were happy to see the world continue as before.  It really
   makes things much easier this way.  For one thing, Monday mornings are
   tough enough without having to cope with global anarchy.  You should
   try driving from Antwerp to Brussels on a Monday morning.  Actually,
   after enough Belgian drivers, global destruction does not seem such a
   bad alternative.  Where was I...?  Oh yes, states and events...
   I'm sure there is some good reason for the form of FSM that you were
   taught.  Perhaps it was Monday morning.  That'd be a good reason.  As
   far as I can see, both forms are equivalent.  It's like saying:

       (--) When-Hungry
            + Eat-Some-Food
            + Drink-Some-Beer
            + Check-If-Still-Hungry
       (--) When-Tired
            + Go-To-Bed

    Rather than:

       + Eat-Some-Food
       + Drink-Some-Beer
       + Check-If-Still-Hungry
          (--) When-Hungry
       + Go-To-Bed
          (--) When-Tired

   The first way just seems much clearer.


   From:           	Shivakumar Gopalakrishnan <kumar@sat-i.com>
   Subject:        	Re: Can you send me more info on iMatix Studio?
   -----------------------------------------------------------------------
   Hi 
   Go open source!!! It is great that you releasing your "components" as
   opensource.
   I just have two questions:
   1. Do you plan to convert gslgen to work as an XSLT? That would be
   great!!
   2. It is more of a request actually, I am totally new to multi-threading
   concepts and it would help me greatly if you could have 1-3 samples
   using SMT (kind of "Hello world" programs) instead of the current Xitami
   example, which is better understood after going through simple samples.
   Thanks
   Shivakumar Gopalakrishnan
   Structural Analysis Technologies, Inc.
   http://www.sat-i.com
   kumar@sat-i.com


   "XSLT" means "Extra-Super-Large T-shirt", for those who are unsure.
   I'm sorry to report that the iMatix T-shirts are all just plain large,
   (JPLT).  However, our JPLT's are superior to the W3C's XSLT's due to
   their logo, "It's Linger Fickin Good!".  For more comparisons between
   GSLgen and XSLT, see our technical white paper on Code Generation at
   www.imatix.com.
   "SMT" stands for 'simple multithreading', which means it's supposed to
   be easy.  We use a metric called the 'Monday morning effect' (MME) to
   determine whether something really is simple or not.  To measure the
   MME rating for a product design, you need a uncaffeinated user at 8am
   on Monday morning.  Present user with product, note user's reactions.
   On a standardized MME rating, SMT scored 70%.  High values are good.
   For comparison, a standard bistro espresso machine scored 98%, while
   networking a Windows 98 and Windows NT system scored 32%.


   From:           	"Hustead, Robert" <Robert.Hustead@AIG.com>
   Subject:        	Using PCDATA and CDATA from GSL.
   -----------------------------------------------------------------------
   I recently downloaded GSL and it looks almost exactly what I need.  
   What I want to do is to create something like the Libero package that
   actually holds fragments of Java code that implement the "actions".  I
   want to do this because I don't like the idea of reworking code that
   was merged with generated code when some required modifications force a
   2nd generation.  I'd rather keep the code fragments with the "action"
   definitions. I was getting ready to try to write a custom generator
   from an XML format.
   With my custom solution, the problem that I faced and solved was the
   presense of embedded <, > and & characters. < and > are used in Java.
   If you embed Java code in an XML document containing these chars, the
   XML parser will choke.  The answer is to embed the Java fragments in a
   CDATA block.  CDATA blocks are designed be pass illegal XML text through
   the XML parser.
   The following is valid XML:

   <fragment>
   <![CDATA[
   if( speed < limit ) proceed();
   xml_out.println("<embedded_tag>Look Ma</embedded_tag>");
   ]]>
   </fragment>

   In exploring gslgen I began playing with "hello world"  I could not get
   at the text between mark up tags in the schema.  I found an example on
   the /gslgen/doc/tour/index9.htm file that used the ".insert" command.  I
   tried this and it did not work.
   So, I have two questions:
   1.  Is there a ".insert" command or equivalent?
   2.  Does the ".insert" command support CDATA sections?
   Thanks,
   Bob Hustead
   Robert.Hustead@aig.com


   Good questions.  GSL/2.000 lets you access an entity value using the
   syntax 'name.'.  But it does not (yet) support CDATA blocks.  We'll
   look at adding this to the XML parser (in sflxmll).  In the meantime
   you can use &lt; and &gt;, which are understood by the parser.  So,
   your code would become:

   <fragment>
   if( speed &lt; limit ) proceed();
   xml_out.println("&lt;embedded_tag&gt;Look Ma&lt;/embedded_tag&gt;");
   </fragment>

   Your idea of using GSLgen to generate Java from XML plus code fragments
   is cool.  Definitely MME 90%.  This is what GSLgen was designed for.


   From:           	Jon Saxton <triton@attglobal.net>
   Subject:        	Re: Liberetto V/1 - Happy Third Millennium
   -----------------------------------------------------------------------
So, I wish you a very happy third millennium ...
   Pieter, I am disappointed.  Of all people, I thought you would be immune
   to the false prophets from the electronic media.
   --
   Jon Saxton <triton@attglobal.net> OS/2 software developer
   U.S. agent for Triton Technologies International Ltd
   http://www.triton.vg/


   This is one of those 'damned if you do, damned if you don't' situations.
   We all agree that this is not *really* the third millennium yet.  There
   was no year zero.  Yet, language is a matter of common accord, so if
   the majority of people decide that this is now the Third Millennium, so
   be it.  I'm certainly not going to spend the next year telling people
   "Hey, it's still the twentieth century!"  Party on!


== REPORT -..----...---.-.----...---..----..-.-.-...-.-.-.---....---.-.-.---

   GSLGEN - an unauthorized biography
   By Darius Blasband <darius@phidani.be>

   I currently work as a consultant for IBM in Belgium, on a project for
   financial markets. Among other mundane issues, I am responsible for the
   architecture and setup of the entire communication infrastructure, as
   the system is built of several smaller sub-systems which must communicate
   with each other.

   The project started with several imposed decisions, namely, using
   MQSeries for the communicating among sub-systems, and XML for the message
   format - while plain object serialization would have been a natural
   choice since the entire project is Java-based.

   I don't really mind: these choices are reasonable. The objections I have
   about such early technical decisions are of two kind:

   - How sure are we that these choices won't change in the future? For
     instance, sending and receiving messages using XML might prove far
     too inefficient to meet the performance requirements of the application.
   - I sure don't want application programmers to start fooling around with
     XML management code nor the (intricate) MQSeries API. Such technical
     issues should be totally hidden.

   In order to cope with these issues, and abstract the complexity of the
   communication layer entirely, I used GSLGEN. Based on a central and very
   high-level description of the messages to send, a schema produces Java
   classes to represent messages, as well as the streaming (to XML) and
   parsing (from XML) code automatically. The application programmer does
   not see XML nor MQSeries: he (or she) just sends and receives messages
   in the form of Java objects.

   This was the starting point, we soon extended this and GSLGEN delivered
   more and more:

   - Since we induce an XML representation for our messages based on our
     central high-level dictionary, we also produce the corresponding XML
     DTD for documentation purposes, for the various third parties who
     might communicate with our system.
   - We produce an extensive HTML-based documentation which describes all
     messages, their interactions, etc...
   - The Java messages are generated with a random data facility, which 
     basically fills the object's attributes with random data for volume
     test purposes.
   - Various tracing and debugging facilities
   - We even produce the MQSeries setup file!

   Things went even further: the application at hand is based on IBM's San
   Francisco framework. A San Francisco class can barely be written by hand:
   the only reasonable way of creating a class in the framework is to use
   one of the supported CASE tools, and have San Francisco-specific code
   generators produce the wealth of ancillary code required to interact
   properly with the San Francisco environment. 

   At some stage, we needed to integrate our messages in San Francisco, and
   after twiddling here and there, we found a strange way to solve our
   problem: since we needed classes to be created from within the CASE tool,
   we used GSLGEN to produce a script in the CASE tool's scripting language,
   which created the classes and attributes we needed! As amazing as it may
   sound, we used the CASE tool as intermediate compilation stage!

   In the beginning, I was using GSLGEN as a kind of black magic: no one
   understood what I was up to. It was a guru-kind of tool. After a while, 
   a few other members of the team started using it, and enjoyed generating 
   code rather than manually coding repetitive operations. 

   There are a few minor things one can complain about: the GSLGEN
   documentation is so sparse and sometimes, so cryptic, that I read 
   some parts hundreds of times, up to a point where I think I can sing 
   large pieces by heart (perhaps even tapdance. I'll try soon...). 
   We also experienced some bizarre behavior here and there, but we 
   always found ways of overcoming the limitations we found. 

   Sometimes, we also felt the need for additional expressive power, in
   expressions as well as in control statements, but we've heard this
   was something IMATIX Corp. was working on actively. We can hardly wait...

   All in all, the gain in productivity when compared to a manual brute force
   approach has been huge, the level of quality is excellent since there are
   far fewer places where a coder can introduce an error. Even more than code
   only, producing the collaterals, such as the automatically generated 
   documentation, increases the overall value of the project significantly.
   I had a hard time introducing GSLGEN in the project in the beginning. Now,
   the entire team is enthusiastic for it.

   P.S.: Of course, this does not imply
   that IBM endorses the opinions described
   above. Unless, of course, IBM stands for
   International Blasband Machines.


== TERMINATE THE PROGRAM -...---...-..----....-.---..---...-...---.-...---.-

   DISCLAIMER: while we have made every effort to keep this journal totally
   free of anything that might resemble intelligence, humor, or even low
   wit, we cannot guarantee that an accidental coincidence of words may be
   interpreted as such.  Under no circumstances will iMatix Corporation,
   its affiliates, employees, guard dogs, or coffee machine operators be
   held responsible for the consequences of anything which might happen.

   To unsubscribe, just send us an e-mail.
